the first senior Israeli official has
resigned over hamas's October attack the
military intelligence Chief took
responsibility for major security
failures what message does it send
during Israel's war on Gaza and could it
be the first step towards accountability
this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Muhammad jamj more than six months after
Hamas carried out an ambitious
multi-prong defensive on Southern Israel
the highest ranking Israeli government
official has stepped down in his
resignation letter Major General Aaron
haliva noted that Authority comes with
responsibility and admitted the military
intelligence directorate under his
command had failed to warn of the
October 7th attack it comes as public
outrage against perceived Israeli
government and military failures gains
momentum we'll delve into the
ramifications of jiva's departure and
examine the demands for accountability
with our panel in a moment but first
this report from Axel
zovich a major shakeup at the highest
level of Israeli military intelligence
Major General aarun haliva has stepped
down more than 6 months after the
surprise attack by Hamas fighters on
Southern Israel that killed
1,139 people his res Nation letter
States the intelligence directorate
under my command did not fulfill its
task I have carried that black day with
me ever
since haliva had already taken full
responsibility publicly in the days
after the offensive but stayed on due to
the ongoing war in Gaza now he's become
the first senior Israeli official to
resign over the lapse in security
reports suggest up to a year before the
October 7th attack Israel had received
intelligence that Hamas Was preparing
for an effect
ensive in the days leading up to it both
allies and Israeli military intelligence
noted unusual activity in
Gaza but those warnings were not heated
and the Israeli military was taken by
surprise leading to a delayed response
haliva has called for the establishment
of a state committee to fully
investigate the failings that led to the
unprecedented assault his resignation
has increased pressure on prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu who has resisted
calls to step down there is uh one line
that uh was uh directed is directed to
uh the Prime Minister he says Authority
comes with
responsibility and Netanyahu is the
highest Authority and he never took
responsibility so actually Mr khwa
wanted to set kind of a
personal mess message to
nany uh to tell him if I can do it you
also should do it with ala's departure
the focus now turns to how Israel's
military and political leadership will
address the growing public demand for
accountability Axel zovich Al jazer for
Inside
Story all right let's go ahead and bring
in our panel in London Daniel Levy is
the president of the US Middle East
project he advised AUD Barack when he
served as Israeli Prime Minister in
Sydney Australia Anthony Lowenstein is
the author of The recently published
book The Palestine laboratory a global
investigation into how Israel's
occupation has provided a testing ground
for weapons and Technology exported
globally and in Tel Aviv Gideon Levy is
a columnist for the haret newspaper and
the author of the punishment of Gaza a
book about the development of the
Israeli policy that led to the 2009
invasion of the Gaza Strip a warm
welcome to you all and thanks so much
for joining us today on Inside Story
Daniel let me start with you today so
Military Intelligence Chief Aaron haliva
has become the first senior Israeli
official to resign over failures to
prevent the October 7th attack I'm
curious about the timing why step down
now and will this set the stage for more
resignations I cannot speak to that
question of timing there are rumors
regarding uh one of his deputies having
to have left for health issues which may
have actually delayed uh jiva's uh
departure there is certainly speculation
and there has been for some time that
some of the security military Chiefs uh
who have very early on stated their
intention that they would not continue
uh after the end of this War I think
it's clear that Netanyahu is looking at
a a long War a Forever War perhaps um
that that they would step down I think
for some this was in intended to build
pressure on the Prime Minister it may be
that some now feel that there is no
pressure on the Prime Minister and that
this is a way of trying to generate that
of course uh there's no serious uh
undertaking of a commission of inquiry
but I think one can get lost in those
granular details and miss the big
picture which is that whether it's
inside the military or the political
class the ability to seriously reflect
uh on not just what happened on that day
and this is the crucial thing if one
focuses narrowly on this idea that there
was an intelligence failure and it
almost cches the essence of everything
that's wrong with the way this is looked
at that the Intel Chief has gone first
because the problem isn't one of Intel
in that narrow security military sense
the problem is
intelligence in terms of the broad word
if you looked it up in a dictionary
Intelligence being intelligent not being
stupid and the idea that you could keep
Palestinians in this situation without
rights without
infranet under occupation under an
apartheid regime and that this would
deliver security that's not a question
of whether the Intel flows were working
properly that's a basic stupidity that
will never hold Anthony I saw you
reacting to what Daniel was saying there
so I want to let you jump in but I also
want to ask you what message does this
send while the war on Gaza continues
well I'd say to the Israeli public who
are increasingly disillusioned with the
war not very strong I mean as Daniel
rightly says if one looks at
intelligence in a very narrow sense then
October 7 was a catastrophe for Israel
but in the broader sense this was Far
bigger than that and what I mean by that
is that for many many years many in the
Israeli public this is not just a
government and intelligence failure many
in the Israeli public were sold
convinced I would say Hoodwinked in to
believing that gazin 2.3 million of them
could be caged indefinitely without any
kind of serious response and along the
Gaza Israel fence there has been huge
amounts of Israeli companies that have
spent lots of money billions and
billions of dollars something I look at
in my book trying to protect Israel from
garans which clearly fail miserably and
it's interesting to know many of those
companies that failed so miserably on
that day their technology failed their
sight failed are selling and testing
weapons in Gaza as we speak to foreign
buyers another words an intelligence
chief chief can leave can resign other
people may follow none of that will
change the fact that the end of this war
whenever that happens Israel will be
less safe than it was on October the
6th Gideon in jiva's resignation letter
he wrote that Authority comes with
responsibility and that's being
interpreted by many in Israel as a
suggest question that it may be time for
prime minister Netanyahu that he go
ahead and resign do you believe that
haliva was intending to send that signal
that it's time for Netanyahu to face
accountability it might very be aliwa is
quite a political guy with a lot of
friends in the political environment
which protests against netan but you
know khiva is not in a position to tell
others what to do I I'm not surprised
that is resigning I'm surprised he's
resigning only now because he couldn't
function ever since the 7th of October
how can he function ever since then who
would listen to him and if someone would
listen to him what kind of
responsibility is it to listen to such a
failure so khwa together with all the
generals must go and in the same time I
totally agree to anony and Daniel namely
that we the failure of the seven is just
a small failure this does not mean that
people are responsible for this failure
shouldn't go away the big failure is
still untouched in Israel Israel did not
draw any lessons from the sevens Israel
still believes and maybe more
intensively in the old beliefs that we
can continue with the occupation
continue with the apartheid and we can
live on our sword only on our sword
forever Gideon let me just follow up
with you and ask you about the fact that
haliva also called for the establishment
of a state committee to fully
investigate the failings that led to the
assault on October 7 is that something
we're going to see happen at any point
soon even if we'll see it Muhammad don't
expect too much from it those
investigation committees in Israel first
of all their work last for months and
years until no one remembers what was
the cause of their establishment and
then they are always vague and never put
it this is the experience until now
maybe we will now invent a new kind of
Committee of Investigation committee but
everyone who speaks about investigation
committee means to postpone everything
until the investigation will be
concluded which will be years time there
is very little to investigate here
things are so clear there was no Army on
the seventh there was no Intelligence on
the seventh that Israel is occupying in
Gaza in the West Bank for decades
without having any solution and any
intention to put an end to it Daniel I
can see you reacting as well to what
Gideon is saying there so I'm going to
give you the chance to go ahead and jump
in as well go
ahead well I always enjoy if that's the
right word um listening to
Gideon and this is the point I I I I
don't think people should have
expectations from what an investigation
within that structure
within that system can come up with
because the questions will not be the
questions that need to be asked yes
there'll be things about you know was
material that was passed on taken
seriously but it it's that granular
detail which is the least important
lesson to learn because the questions
that one can almost be guaranteed will
not be on the table are the questions of
what are the root causes how do we treat
the Palestinians and here you know I
think sometimes get bitis we make this
so much about Netanyahu it's a system
it's a systemic structural violence
thing that the political class in the
military are all CAU up in when when you
do hear people say well there's got to
be diplomacy fine that's right but if
the diplomacy on offer is nothing more
than how one manages this system of
occupation and aparte then that's not
actually an alternative so the question
won't be on the table of whether
Israel's process of having having
security collaboration with a
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank
that has no credibility with its people
of trying to blockade glaza indefinitely
because you think perhaps you can
domesticate Hamas of a regional set of
relations which are are built on I would
argue a castle of Sands you know what
what do what have these normalization
Abraham Accord agreements done for
Israel in practice all they've taught
the Israelis is this idea a false idea
that things are okay if we make peace
with some people in the Gulf we can
continue to keep the Palestinians in
this condition so the crucial questions
that need to be asked will not be asked
and what Anthony said earlier is really
important because one of the signals
this sends is that this so-called
startup Nation Hightech power has been
exposed for its vulnerabilities and its
failures and the world is seeing this
and the world is seeing that Israel is
not managing asymmetric Warfare
effectively because Hamas and I would
argue some of the other resistance axis
actors are showing that you can turn the
power of Israel on itself because when
Israel responds in this hugely
disproportionate way it is in fact
undermining its own equities whether
they be legal moral deterrence Etc so
Anthony if we can pick up on what Daniel
was saying there and I saw you nodding
your head uh responding to some of what
he was saying there if there is this
system in place what happens in the
event that there are more resignations
let's say at some point that netanyahu's
political career comes to an end many
people in Israel are calling for him to
resign if we get to a scenario whereby
that actually happens or if there are
new elections what happens
thereafter I wish I could say the
outcome would be very different
Netanyahu on current polling would
probably lose an election but his likely
successor Benny Gant is virtually no
different on Gaza on the occupation on
any accountability just this week the US
has announced possible sanctions on the
particularly extreme element of the IDF
whove committed huge crimes in the West
Bank Benny gans's response was equal
outrage along with Netanyahu in other
words if we expect there to be radical
change when a different prime minister
comes into waare will be disappointed
and this goes I think to the broader
point that accountability within Israel
Over decades has barely existed in other
words there's barely been any soldiers
let alone generals actually held to
account for crimes committed in the West
Bank or Gaza the only way I would argue
this will really ever change and I would
argue similarly with the US with its
behavior in Iraq and Afghanistan in the
last 20 or so years are international
Trials of soldiers or generals or
politicians before an international
Court the ha for example that shows
there will be a cost a price for
committing crimes in Gaza or the West
Bank and it's worth saying finally that
we can investigate or Israel can
investigate the 7th of October as much
as it wants how about what's happened in
the last six months the 7th of October
in my view was a crime but what's been
happening in the last 6 months 35 45
50,000 potential Palestinians killed the
vast majority of her civilians there
will be no investigation within Israel
for those pal inian who have been killed
and without accountability in an
international Forum or Court nothing as
I and Gideon has been writing this
relentlessly for years but especially
since October 7 Israeli culture within
the public forget about the military of
intelligence there's a blood lust and
without accountability globally sadly
this will not change Gideon you heard
Anthony there talk about the fact that
you've written extensively about what
you call a blood lust in Israeli society
and that's something that I wanted to
ask you specifically about it's been a
theme in a lot of your writing in one of
your more recent columns you wrote that
it's doubtful there has ever been so
much thirst for blood and war in Israel
and I'm curious to get your thoughts
about how at this particular moment when
there is a lot of condemnation of
Netanyahu and polling suggests that he's
at an all-time low when it comes to
credibility trust from the public
popularity
how much is the fact that what you're
calling this Blood lust existing in
Israeli Society how much is that helping
him and his cohorts in
government unfortunately it helps him a
lot because the 7th of October took the
Israelis out of the closet or change
their minds but in any case after the
7th of October the Israelis feel that
everything is legitimate that Israel has
the right to do whatever it wants no
limits no international law no Humanity
nothing most of the Israelis feel that
Gaza deserves this punishment and most
of the Israel think that Israel didn't
cross any line by killing so many
civilians now netan is
just figure in all these processes but
it's not all about netan I write I
obviously totally agree to anonio say
that Ben Gans will not be any any better
and no one of the potential candidates
in Israel will be any better only
because of the simple reason that there
is quite a consensus in Israeli Society
it is always described as very divided
yes they are very divided about minority
they are very very United much too
United about the basic ISU namely
continuing the occupation going to this
war look how Israel support this war
even after six months of failure
so supporting the war continuing the
occupation continuing the aparte gets
always big big rates in any poll in
Israel of support of of really one
opinion which says much more so after
the sevens one opinion which says we
have the right to do whatever we want
and nobody will tell us what to do
Daniel I've spent quite a bit of time
over the course of the past year
reporting from Israel before October 7th
I was reporting on the judicial overhaul
protest where you saw a lot of anger
directed toward the Netanyahu government
plan to try to overhaul the Judiciary
now after October 7th there have been
these protests that have been increasing
uh first it was the family of captives
uh that are being held in Gaza now there
are more explicit anti-government
demonstrations and I'm curious to get
your thoughts about if you think that
these different protest movement will
coales against around sort of a an
overall anger towards Netanyahu and and
how that impacts him specifically at a
time when his popularity is at an
all-time low when people are so angry at
him when there are government officials
that are saying they're taking
responsibility for the intelligence
failure that led to October 7th but
Netanyahu has continued to say he
essentially he's not taking
responsibility that he'll answer tough
questions but it'll be later
well Muhammad I I I followed some of
that reporting that you
undertook yes the protests have uh
increased in intensity uh in recent
weeks somewhat less since this mini
escalation with Iran uh there was anger
over the extent to which Netanyahu has
deprioritized the hostage issue there
was the return to some of that division
that we saw prior to October 7th and it
may well be that nanyu is in trouble
politically uh the polling is not
looking good for him but there's no
election on the horizon and this is one
of the reasons why Netanyahu is a
particularly dangerous uh leader at the
moment uh beyond what we have gotten
used to because it seems that his own
political future is tied in to the
continuing of the war but I think it's
it's really crucial to not lose sight of
what's been mentioned which is that if
you zoom out the question of natany who
is a very effective politician he's very
effective regionally internationally we
can't take that away from him but the
path that he has set out is is really
quite consensual and you know if one
goes back to to October 7th and
absolutely that was a violation of
international law preceded by Israel's
violations continued
afterwards the one of the things that
made that possible and makes the
failings possible is if you dehum I the
other side if you hold them in such
contempt then that puts you on the path
to the kind of hubris which I think LED
uh to these failures in the in the in in
what happened and you know the fact that
Israel is at the international court of
justice plausibly violating the genocide
convention the fact that a un special
rapporter can write a report Franchesco
alanes the anatomy of a genocide shows
how much deeper than nanyu this goes the
former labor leader who's the president
of Israel Isaac herzo he's the first
person the icj quoted in terms of
incitement to genocide and I believe
because the question that hangs in the
air is whether it's Natan yahu or
not how does one envisage possible
change a possible different Dynamic
where we're not all sitting here saying
it's not just nanyu it's not just gants
it's the almost the entirety of the
Zionist political class so I think
there's a problem here in terms of the
project in terms of whether Zionism can
do what's written on the tin and deliver
security for Jewish Israelis it is
failed to do that it's obviously
delivered Devastation for Palestinians
how does that begin to change that's
where one gets into the question of
impunity Because unless Israel's cost
benefit calculation looks different
unless Israel is held accountable I'm
not saying that would force Israelis to
change but it means that Israelis start
to ask the questions of is it worth it
to treat the Palestinians like this if
the answer is you can get away with
anything then the question if it's if
it's worth it doesn't even get asked
Gideon I saw you reacting to what Daniel
was saying there it looked like you
wanted to jump in please go
ahead no we we are all agreeing more or
less on on the point that focusing on
Nan is is a mistake I I claim it now for
years when the Israeli protest is
demonstrating and demonstrating my best
friends they are demonstrating against
Nan this is fair enough this is just but
it's not the point and I tell you more
than this pay attention to the
Protestant Israel none of them is
protesting against the war none of them
is protesting against the mess killing
of Gaza none of them is protesting
against the starvation the The Killing
Children the the the uprooted people the
the the refugees none of them is
mentioned it's only about getting rid
getting rid of netan
it is very easy to see netan as as the
big Satan which he is in many ways but
hey what are you suggesting instead of
Fe whom are you suggesting instead of Fe
do you really touch the core of the
problem or you found yourself your
comfort Life by pointing out netan just
get rid of him Israel will turn back to
become the paradise that we dreamed
about So my answer says guys that's not
the point yeah Daniel I mean Gideon is
making a good point there the fact is
that in pole after poll in Israel uh
it's reflected that while most Israelis
want to see Netanyahu go most of them
are also still supporting the war effort
correct and exactly and that's a it's a
convenient story that some in the west
some of Israel's enablers in the US are
telling themselves so Hegel the the
Democrat lead in the Senate gives this
speech considered pathbreaking but it
really boils down to if only there was
no nanyu things would be okay the Biden
Administration sometimes seems to to to
Echo this kind of thing it's a really
convenient really
mistaken way to look at this it's an
easy place to go because no one wants to
actually challenge the root causes of
this and unless you do you're not going
to get anywhere
you know netanyahu's successor may be
better may be worse but it's systemic
one has to address that systemic
problem Anthony if we're talking about
systemic issues within Israel and the
Israeli government one of the questions
that continues to be asked in the wake
of this resignation is is this a first
step towards accountability in Israel
but if you're talking about
accountability that looks different
depending on who you're asking right I
mean you have accountability in Israel
towards the Israeli people with regards
to the failures that led to the October
7th attack but then you have what many
in the International Community are
calling for which is accountability for
atrocities committed in Gaza isn't that
right for sure and essentially Israel is
both unwilling and incapable of doing so
within its own legal system they've
shown that for years and years and I
think the question that we're talking
about really really goes to a more
existential one for Israel it was an
interesting piece
last week in the New York Times written
by Benny Morris the right-wing Isel
historian who I don't agree with on
pretty much anything but he said
something very interesting within that
he supported going into rougher and all
these terrible things but he said
something and I'm paraphrasing here
words to the effect of it's really
inarguable that it's it is the most
unsafe place in the world to be Jewish
these days is Israel now what does that
tell you about Israel 75 years or so
after its birth that of course
anti-Semitism is real and some places in
the world undeniably it's a growing
problem but if a so-called respected
again someone I don't really agree with
but someone who is a member of the
Israeli establishment argues and says
that point almost as a throwaway Line
This goes far far deeper than Netanyahu
or frankly any political leader in
Israel this goes to an existential
question of Israel's future that the
whole so-called dream of Zionism as
Daniel said was to provide safety for
Jews and clearly and I would argue
almost impossible to argue against this
it is not safe for Jews now and I would
argue long before October 7 and
certainly in the last six months it's
even got more unsafe for Jews within
Israel and I would argue in the global
diaspora this is the problem Israel
faces and without International pressure
which I think will start to build the US
and London are not going to be pushing
for arms embargos but certain States
will and sanctions and trying to put
Israeli soldiers on in the coming years
that will happen or at least attempts
will for that to happen and this is
where the the game can change all right
well we have run out of time so we're
going to have to leave the conversation
there thanks so much to our guests
Daniel Levy Anthony Lowenstein and
Gideon
Levy and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website al.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's facebook.com/ AJ insid story
you can also join the conversation on X
our handle is at AJ inside story from me
Muhammad jamj and the whole team here
bye for now
[Music]